Embedded Response Capacity against Swarm Terrorism 
Abstract 


On the morning of October 7th, 2023, Hamas attacked the state of Israel in a manner that is consistent with the definition of a “swarm invasion”. In the invasion’s first hours, it appeared like the violent non-state actor (VNSA) achieved its goal. The attack led to the collapse of Israel’s border defense infrastructure and paralyzed its command and control systems. However, throughout the day, it became clear that despite the disadvantageous starting conditions, Hamas failed in achieving its main goal - invading deeper inside Israel and occupying civilian communities for a long period of time. Hamas’s plans were thwarted by a grassroots response of Israelis who reported to the scene, established ad hoc combat squads, and engaged the invaders. 


This paper explains how Hamas’s plans were thwarted through the framework of “embedded response capacity” (ERC). In a nutshell, ERC reflects a situation in which first responders’ organizations can effectively and instantly switch from routine deployment to crisis mode, even in the face of a catastrophic event that prevents them from responding according to established protocols. In this work, we further develop this analytical framework and empirically test its assumptions. For that end, we have collected information about 369 Israeli security personnel who perished during the October 7th Hamas attack in Southern Israel. 


Introduction - The October 7th Paradox 
On Saturday, October 7th, 2023, at 6:29 AM, Hamas challenged Israel’s basic security premises, chief among them that Hamas is both deterred from and unable to perform a large-scale attack. Approximately 6,000 operatives crossed the “smart barrier” (also known as the iron wall) - a set of fences and advanced sensors above and below ground - at 119 points along the Israel-Gaza border. Forces from Hamas’s elite unit, the Nukhba, shortly after invading, arrived at Re’im Base, Gaza Division’s Headquarters, and cut off its communication infrastructure, and at dozens of other military and civilian locations (Meniv, 2024). 


Command and Control (C2) literature argues that a military organization that loses its “core nerve system”, meaning its ability to receive situation reports, process data, and give commands, enters a systemic paralysis. Without direction, the units on the ground would not function until the chain of command is restored (Spak & Anderson, 2022). On October 7th, 2023, this was not the case. Thousands of combat soldiers - conscripts, reserves, police, and Shin Bet (Israel’s internal security agency)- spontaneously assembled at the Gaza Envelope, where the attack transpired. They did so without receiving any orders, without proper communication systems, and while many of them were unarmed. Despite the difficult opening conditions, they managed to halt the swarm attack, regain control over most of the civilian communities, and prevent the enemy from deepening its penetration into Israel within several hours. 


This paper asks, then, what conditions allowed for an effective military response despite the systematic collapse? We offer the term Embedded Response Capacity (ERC) as a basis for answering this research question and put it to an empirical test. ERC encompasses the characteristics that enable a force to respond effectively in a crisis in which large-scale communications and command-and-control structures are disabled, relying only on the skills of the responding forces. 


This work contributes to understanding how modern state armies, confronted with new security challenges that exploit their difficulty in adapting, can still maintain enough flexibility to overcome these threats. This work can also help broaden understanding of organizational resilience beyond logistical preparedness, business crisis management, and responses to civilian crises, topics that most of the current literature addresses. Instead, it offers insights into organizational resilience as it manifests in the structural, cultural, and operational characteristics of fighting forces - an understanding that is becoming more and more relevant as many countries around the world find themselves responding to terrorism broadly, in swarm terrorism in particular. A significant methodological contribution this paper makes is the use of casualty analysis as a proxy for mapping tactical initiative and force mobilization in uncertain environments. This methodology is especially meaningful, as terrorism often creates situations in which it is difficult to trace all responding forces, as some are unaccounted for due to the nature of battles involving spontaneously joined forces. 


For practitioners, this paper can offer a path towards new deployment models that are more in line with modern warfare. Instead of being regarded as a financial liability, the Israeli model of “People’s Army”, incorporating conscripts and reserves from most parts of society, the reserves being numerically more significant, can be reimagined as a critical operational asset in the reality of swarm warfare and hybrid terrorism, requiring fast deployment of forces that are not needed routinely. 


The paper continues as follows: the next section sets the theoretical background regarding swarm terrorism - an increasingly used approach in modern terrorism. Then, the concept of organizational resilience is explored to offer explanations for the success in countering swarm terrorism. The literature review is followed by the hypotheses and a methodological section that presents the extensive database created for this study and the stages of testing the hypotheses. Lastly, the findings are presented, followed by a discussion and concluding remarks. 


Literature Review and Theoretical Framework 
Swarm Terrorism 
Swarming is a term mostly used nowadays in military affairs to describe drones and UAVs. However, human swarming is not a new phenomenon, as its use has been recorded as early as the 4th century BC. Yordanov defines swarm terrorism as a “pre-planned, coordinated, multi-vector terrorist attack, in which several separate terrorist units attack with different tactical methods simultaneously or in a short temporal interval, multiple heterogeneous targets or one target from several sides, aiming for the maximum number of human casualties and large material damage". The American Department of Homeland Security (DHS), defines a complex coordinated terrorist attack as “an act of terrorism that is carried out by synchronized and independent teams at multiple locations in succession or close succession, initiated with little or no warning, and using one or more weapons systems such as firearms, explosives, arson, and other unconventional attack methods, which are intended to result in large numbers of casualties” (Yordanov, 2025). These two definitions emphasize key characteristics of swarming: coordination, the deployment of multiple teams of operatives, targeting multiple locations, and a high number of casualties. Unlike linear warfare, swarms lack a clear, identifiable locus, making it harder for the defender to respond. Dividing into several attacking squads risks overwhelming the defender, mulling its response to the threat. 


Swarming is used by those attackers who wish not just harm their adversary but also disrupt its cohesion and achieve a significant psychological effect, such as in the case of terrorism. Tactically, there are two types of swarming: a dispersed swarm, in which the attacking squads never form a single body, and a mass swarm, in which the attackers launch their operation as one unit and then split into smaller groupings. The first is more prevalent nowadays. Both types of swarming, however, have similar stages. At first, the attackers locate the target; then they converge and attack; and lastly, they disperse, allowing another squad of attackers to approach the target. In order to successfully perform a swarming attack, the swarmers have to maintain elusiveness, which means they must be highly mobile and concealed, have a longer range of fire power, collect information to be used in the next wave, protect their communication and disrupt the adversary’s communication, and most notably, have a superior situational awareness to allow them to surprise their adversary. However, swarming has several key limitations as well. For example, it, in most cases, does not allow for a quick knockout and is dependent on the terrain and logistics to allow the swarmers to break away from the main body of attackers. Despite swarming’s potential for destruction, several ways exist to mitigate the threat and halt or minimize attacks. As mobility is an important asset of swarmers, fixing them in place can stall or halt them. Other ways to deprive them of their relative advantages are to make it harder for them to conceal themselves by modifying physical conditions, and to cut them off from their logistical bases and electronically interfere with their communication with the headquarters and superiors. Building fortifications that are harder for small squads to penetrate and hardening communication infrastructure are defensive, albeit effective methods to cope with swarming terrorism (Edwards, 1999; Arquilla & Ronfeldt, 2013). 


Tracing the history of terrorism in the last decades paints a picture of growing adoption of swarming terrorism among violent non-state actors (VNSAs). The most prominent examples are the attacks in Mumbai (2008), Paris (2015), and, indeed, Southern Israel (2023). In Mumbai, more than 160 casualties were recorded in a series of explosions in five locations in close vicinity (CST Railway Station, the Leopold Cafe, the Taj Hotel, the Oberoi Hotel, and the Nariman House), within 40 minutes. The terrorists, working in small groups assembled by each group’s designated targets and associated with the Pakistani Lashkar-e-Tayyiba, were equipped with GPS, phones, and an inflatable, motorized dinghy to maintain communication and mobility (NDTV 2009). Similarly, 130 casualties were recorded in Paris in the span of 30 minutes,  at at least three locations (Bataclan Theatre, restaurants and bars at the 10th and 11th arrondissements, and Stade de France). The terrorists, affiliated with the Islamic State in Iraq and al-Sham (ISIS), were divided into smaller squads and rented a gateway car and hotel rooms in advance to maintain mobility and concealment (Seibt, 2015). In both cases, as in the case of the October 7th, 2023, Hamas attack, which is discussed in greater detail in the sections below, the terrorists operated in a semi-military fashion. In the Hamas case, it attacked multiple locations - military bases, civilian communities, and roads - in coordination, disrupting Israel’s communication and command and control systems, and, like in Mumbai and Paris, overwhelmed the state apparatus. These conditions make the top-down response all but irrelevant in the case of swarm terrorism, as the situation on the ground develops faster than senior echelons can gather information and issue instructions. Thus, the response by those security personnel on the scene becomes the most effective means of addressing the crisis.  


 A graph with colorful circles and numbers

AI-generated content may be incorrect. 



Organizational Resilience 
In order to effectively respond to swarm terrorism, a state and its armed forces must be resilient. Resilience is defined as the “emergent property of an organizational system that relates to the inherent and adaptive qualities and capabilities that enable an organization’s adaptive capacity during turbulent periods”. Being resilient, moreover, means that the responding organization has an improved situational awareness and reduced vulnerabilities to systematic risk environments. On the face of it, this was not the case for the Israel Defense Forces on the morning of October 7th, 2023, as they were extremely vulnerable and lacked proper situational awareness. They did, however, possess another feature of a resilient organization - the ability to respond efficiently following a disruption - which became evident by their relatively swift retaking of the Gaza Envelope (Burnard & Bhama, 2011). 
Prior to the important discussion of the Israeli response, it is important to understand the resilience paradox as it manifested in the IDF on the day of the attack. On the one hand, the IDF lacked certain aspects of resilience, like the ability to anticipate and avoid an impending attack, and cognition, the capacity to recognize the degree of emerging risk facing a community and act on that information. Even if there is a basis to believe it was aware of the danger, it suffered from bounded uncertainty, which meant that it did not know if, when, or how an attack would happen, even given the background of conflict and tension, which led it to fail to understand the risk and urgency of it. It might even be possible that certain levels of government, such as municipalities or civil society, understood and responded within their capacities, but the higher echelons did not. On the other hand, the IDF did possess other features of resilience - the ability to adjust to disruptions and changing conditions, and restore efficiency (Burnard et al., 2018; Comfort, 2007; Duchek, 2020; Greene, 2010).
The literature argues that the most difficult crises are those characterized by uncertainty, uniqueness, and the need for the entire system to respond (Christensen et al., 2016). This characterization suits the October 7th, 2023, attack, as the conditions on the ground were uncertain and unique. Since military installations, civilian communities, and infrastructure were attacked,  and given the sheer scale of the attack, the most severe in Israel’s history, there was a need for a whole-of-government response. Given the aspects of resilience that the IDF lacked on the day of the attack, and the extreme conditions it faced, it is not intuitive that IDF forces managed to halt Hamas and retake the conquered territories within approximately two days. To explain that, a deeper examination of crisis management steps is warranted. 
Despite using slightly different definitions and formulations, the literature broadly agrees on several steps that are required for effective management of crises: preparedness, detection, interpretation, activation, communication, response, adjustment, and learning (Burnard & Bhama, 2011; Burnard et al., 2018; Christensen et al., 2016; Comfort, 2007; Duchek, 2020; Koronis & Ponis, 2018; Williams et al., 2017). It is clear that the IDF was only partially ready, as it had some procedures in place. However, its deployment on the ground and the forces’ ability to respond to such an all-encompassing scenario were limited (Fabian, 2025). The detections and interpretation were also limited, and it seems that while some detected the threat right away, even declaring a war had begun, this understanding was confined to those on the ground (Meniv, 20204). The activation was also a partisan effort, and many active-duty personnel on leave, reservists, and armed and unarmed civilians decided to engage the invaders, divorced of any clear activation order from IDF, police, or Shin Bet headquarters. The communication was also limited and relied on the cellular phone and text messages many times. Therefore, for the first several hours, the response can be characterized as partisan, later evolving to a systematic one. According to reports, the IDF is indeed adjusting and learning from this immense crisis, but it is still too early to judge those efforts (Fabian, 2025). 
However, the literature also details several contributing factors that could explain how, despite the disparities, the IDF successfully halted the Hamas attack and regained control over the Gaza Envelope. The first set of mitigating factors has to do with those responding to the crisis. Fenema and Romme use the term' latent organizing' to describe an event-specific organizational response that enables small, dedicated teams to act on behalf of the organization. These teams are not deployed on a regular basis and are activated only in crisis situations, incorporating ad hoc organizing into crisis management (Fenema & Romme, 2020; Williams et al., 2017). This accurately describes both the regional LOTAR (counterterrorism) units of the IDF, composed of reservists who respond promptly to unfolding events, and the reservists who rushed to areas where fighting was taking place, having been trained for such scenarios during their mandatory service. 
Indeed, the individual is an important factor in organizational crisis management and organizational resilience, to the point that the organization’s survival might depend on it. (Koronis & Ponis, 2018; Burnard & Bhama, 2011). The success of these small teams, however, depends on their being well-trained, having a shared understanding of the threat, a shared knowledge base, and specialization (Williams et al., 2017; Duchek, 2020; Christensen et al., 2016; Comfort, 2007). Since all infantry soldiers in the IDF undergo the same counterterrorism training, they are all well-trained and are specialized in the task that was presented to them on October 7th, 2023. Moreover, the relative homogeneity of the training they all underwent created a shared language and a shared knowledge base, allowing them to grasp the threat similarly. 
Another important contributing factor is flexibility. Flexibility as a part of a resilient crisis management element includes decentralized and collaborative decision making, low formalism, high permeability between organizational boundaries, low embeddedness to macro-culture, collaborative partnerships, self-organizations, and relational capability, which is the ability to translate social connections into resources (Burnard & Bhama, 2011; Duchek, 2020; Williams et al., 2017). Many of these factors existed in the October 7th attack. Since self-organized groupings of fighters led the response in the first several hours, the response was informal, and the decision-making was collaborative and decentralized. Furthermore, since many of the respondents were reservists, the influence of IDF culture was low, and they were able to utilize their connections to augment resources. Lastly, the concept of bricolage, the ability to improvise and solve problems creatively, seems appropriate in this case (Duchek, 2020). Those who fought on October 7th, 2023, showed incredible creativity by finding innovative solutions to on-the-ground obstacles. For example, using WhatsApp to share GPS locations of those hiding from terrorists with rescuing forces, and using household items as weapons for self-defence.  
Israel’s decades-long confrontation with terrorism is embedded in its armed forces, especially the IDF special operations units, Israeli Police tactical units, and Shin Bet operational units, all of which have the features mentioned above. This skill set can be referred to as an embedded response capacity (ERC). In contrast to existing models of crisis response, which focus on institutional fragility under stress, our research foregrounds the resilience of small, highly trained units whose effectiveness lies in their habituated ability to apply training in dynamic, adverse conditions. 


ERC Component 
	Explanation
	The Israeli Case 
	Joint Training
	Mutual tactical language for all branches
	Combat soldiers, policemen, and internal security personnel speak the same operational language 
	Decentralized Execution and Decision Making 
	Delegation of authority to field commanders 
	Mission command and assuming responsibility 
	Urban Warfare
	Familiarity with the operational conditions 
	Frequent trainings in urban warfare facilities 
	Adaptability
	Cognitive flexibility in moving from routine to crisis deployment 
	Instant mental adaptation from routine to fighting
	Ad-Hoc Teaming
	The ability to form fighting squads consisting of fighters from different units 
	Forming of hybrid squads in the field; Brigade Combat Team in every operation and war
	

Two important factors set the stage for the development of such crisis-ready response teams. First, the primacy of the low-intensity threat Israel faces on a daily basis necessitates it to train masses of combat soldiers able to perform as both riot police and counterterrorism (to respond to Palestinian uprisings and terrorist attacks), and as specialized fighters able to fight in the less common case of a conventional war. The fact that Israel follows a mandatory military service means the IDF, and to a certain degree other security agencies, are able to select the most suitable candidates for these positions. The revered status of a combat soldier, let alone a special operations soldier, in Israel enlarges the pool of talented young recruits at the IDF's disposal, many of whom extend their service as a precondition to serving in certain roles, allowing for more specialized training. After they are discharged, they serve as reservists, maintaining some of their operational capabilities and the IDF’s ability to utilize them in times of crisis and to maintain operational knowledge. Moreover, most of those recruited to the Police tactical units and the Shin Bet operational units have served in combat positions in the IDF, further enhancing their specialization and combat and crisis response capabilities (Ben-Ari et al., 2023). These conditions create a latent army that can be activated at any given moment. 
Hypotheses 
H0: There were two “waves” or respondents, one composed of those stationed at the border, and the second composed of volunteers who joined the fighting. 
H1: Most effective combat forces joined voluntarily and were not called on by senior commanders. 
H2: Basic Embedded Response Capacity (ERC) characteristics are reflected in the self-joined forces.


Methodology 
The Database 
The fog of war on October 7th, 2023, prevented the creation and maintenance of a unified log of all those who participated in the fighting. Moreover, in other cases, such information was classified by security forces, preventing researchers from accessing it. Therefore, this work utilizes data on security forces fatalities (n=369) who were killed on October 7th and 8th, 2023, as a proxy. The data was collected from official open sources and was cross-verified:
1. The Israel Defense Forces (IDF) records. The IDF’s dedicated mini-site details each soldier’s name in Hebrew and English, age, rank, unit, and date of falling. In total, we recorded 301 cases from this source. Since Hebrew is a gendered language, the soldier’s gender can also be inferred from this source (Israel Defense Forces, 2023). 
1. Police records. The October 7th, 2023, attack’s fallen police officers were added to the Israeli Police’s general website dedicated to all police personnel who died while serving in the force. Each policeman’s dedicated page includes their name, age, rank, unit, date of falling, place of burial, and details about their family. We recorded 68 cases from this source (Israel Police, 2023). 
1. Israel’s Public Broadcasting Service’s database. Kan, Israel’s public broadcasting service, created an online map, telling the stories of communities and individuals affected by the Hamas attack. The map is not exhaustive as it accounts for only some of the events that transpired in each location. Moreover, it is primarily focused on civilians affected, and fallen security personnel are mostly mentioned only in relation to the civilian victims. The dataset is narrative, so the information available for victims is inconsistent, and some victims may have more detailed pages than others (Kan, 2023). 
1. Civilian-created databases. Several independent initiatives emerged in the aftermath of the October 7th, 2023, attack to document that day's events. The main civilian initiative, Mapping the Massacre, also takes the form of a map, like Kan's dataset. The focus of this initiative is to map the exact location of each of the victims of the attack, including those abducted and injured. In this dataset as well, there are inconsistencies in the information provided for each victim. They are, however, classified based on their affiliation as civilians, security personnel, etc. (Mapping the Massacres 2023). 


The sources mentioned above do not provide all the necessary information for a thorough analysis. For example, the exact location and time of death of all security personnel who perished during the Attack can not be accounted for relying solely on these sources. Therefore, information was also collected and verified using news articles published and testimonies of the nuclear families of the perished, who indicated when the contact with their loved ones was cut off, or provided information they had received from the military, police, or Shin Bet, depending on where their loved one served. Additionally, operational investigations conducted by security agencies were only made public by the press, so this research relied on media outlets for this information.


For each of the fallen, the following information was recorded: 
1. Personal data: name and age.  
1. Organizational affiliation: military, police, Shin Bet, emergency squad. 
1. Unit: specific identification such as Golani 13th battalion, or the Sderot station of the Israel police. 
1. Service status: conscript, professional, or reserve. 
1. Service characteristics: binary variables to describe combat/non-combat, officer/non-officer, special operations unit/not, counterterrorism unit/not, and a non-binary variable to describe the role and rank. 
1. Place of death: name of community, military base, road, etc. (including coordinates). 
1. Time of death: the time relative to the beginning of the attack. For example, 9 AM is recorded as the 3rd hour of the attack. 
1. Mode of joining the battle: a binary variable to describe whether one was on duty while the attack began, or arrived without a clear order to do so. 


This dataset serves as a proxy for information regarding the units and agencies that operated on the ground in Southern Israel on October 7-8, 2023. By accounting for the affiliations of each fallen security personnel, one can infer which units and individual combatants took part in the fighting. Furthermore, by combining this data with the time and place of death for each fallen security personnel, one can determine which unit operated in each location at any given time during these two days. Lastly, by categorizing the individuals who died in battle on duty or as those who joined the fighting, one can create a clear picture of the units that were stationed in the Gaza Envelope on the eve of the Attack, the units called from home or from remote bases to join the fighting, and the affiliation of individuals who joined before they were asked to do so by the authorities. The dataset can be accessed here. 


Context - A Swarm Invasion Anatomy 
Hamas’s success relied on strategic deception. In the years leading up to the attack, Hamas made Israel believe it was deterred and was solely interested, at this point, in financial benefits in the shape of Qatari monetary assistance and permits for Gazans to work in Israel. Even during the “March of Return” protests, Hamas made sure to let Israel know it does not aim for further escalation of tensions (Nakhoul & Saul, 2023). This relative quiet allowed Hamas to plan and execute a simultaneous attack that took advantage of Israel’s static defense posture. On Saturday, October 7th, 2023, at 6:29 a.m., under a barrage of thousands of rockets, 3,800 militants from Hamas's elite “Nukhba” force launched Operation Al-Aqsa Flood. The militants breached the barrier that stood on the border between Israel and Gaza at 119 points using explosive devices and tractors that they had placed near the border in advance (Meniv, 2024). Most notably, in the weekly riots on the border, so-called “The Great March of Return”, Hamas terrorists assimilated in the crowd, using the disruption to plant explosives, while the IDF was preoccupied with the masses of people marching towards the fence.


After breaching the fence, they split into heavily armed squads equipped with AK-47 rifles, RPG rockets, hand grenades, incendiary devices, walkie-talkies, and maps. Their comrades, deployed along the border, provided the raiders with continuous assistance. They launched anti-tank missiles and drones carrying explosives at the observation and monitoring equipment of the Israeli border protection apparatus, neutralizing them. Organized in squads, many militants traveled in pickup trucks with heavy machine guns mounted on them. Others rode motorcycles or hovered using powered paragliders, the latter landing easily inside Israeli civilian communities. Every squad headed to its predesignated target. The targets included eight military bases and outposts, three urban centers, twenty-six agricultural settlements, and open areas where music festivals occurred. Hamas naval commandos set out in boats to another open target - Zikim Beach. Hamas militants took over military outposts and multiple civilian communities within a matter of hours. 


The Hamas offensive was a carefully planned raid. The first wave of attackers, members of Hamas’s elite unit, relied on surprise, capitalizing on their numerous advantages. These advantages included a significant numerical superiority, the availability of weapons and ammunition suitable for a raid, and detailed tactical blueprints. They stormed the Israeli army posts and bases near the border, attacked the communications infrastructure, and neutralized the military's command and control infrastructure. They also set up ambushes on the roads leading to the area under attack, isolating it and preventing reinforcements from arriving. (Dvori, 2023).
The attack, by using multiple techniques and targets, harmed Israel’s ability to respond by blinding it by targeting the cameras and sensor systems; by cutting off almost all communications between commanding echelons and ground forces by targeting communication systems; and by firing thousands of rockets towards Israel, forcing soldiers to enter safe rooms, instead of engaging the enemy at the border and around military bases and civilian communities. Hamas's numerical advantage was also significant. Only about 760 soldiers, some of them, like the observants, were unarmed, faced thousands of invaders carrying superior equipment and in larger numbers (Fabian, 2025). According to data collected in this work, IDF forces stationed at the Gaza border on the eve of the attack included the observants, combat soldiers from the 13th and 51st battalions of the Golani infantry brigade, and from the 77th battalion of the 7th armored brigade. Hence, only three combat battalions and no special operations units were stationed at the Gaza border at that time. It is important to note that October 7th, 2023, was also a Jewish holiday, and so many soldiers were given the weekend off. 
In numerical terms, the ratio between IDF soldiers and invaders was almost 1:8. In military terms, this ratio all but guarantees a swift defeat, especially when the attacker enjoys the advantage of a strategic surprise (Bar-Joseph, 2008). Indeed, the military bases on the frontline were quickly captured or encircled, and communications lines were cut off or burned, which allowed Hamas to isolate the area and prevent almost all communication between those on the frontlines and IDF, police, and Shin Bet headquarters. To further isolate them, Hamas’s Nukhba forces also ambushed those driving on the main roads leading to and from the Gaza Envelope. 
Findings 
Descriptive Statistics  
In the database, N=369. Out of all those security personnel examined, 25 were killed as non-combatants, in their homes or as attendees in the Nova Festival, and did not join the fighting once it erupted. Of the 344 killed in combat, 145 joined the fighting, while 198 were on active duty on the morning of October 7th, 2023; data were missing for 1 individual. Hence, for N=344 killed in combat, 42.15% joined, while 57.56% were on active duty. This distinction is operationally important as those who were stationed in the Gaza Envelope at the time of the attack were the first ones to respond, and ultimately fall. Those who joined, on the other hand, comprise the “second wave” of responders. Moreover, indeed, for those stationed at the Gaza Envelope, the mean time between the start of the attack and their falling is 4 hours, compared to 6.2 hours for those who joined. These two hours represent the time it took for those who were not stationed elsewhere or on active duty to join the fighting. The average time from the beginning of the attack until death for the entire population was 5 hours, with a significant standard deviation of 5.1. This data supports H0, arguing that there were two distinct waves of respondents to the Hamas attack. 


Other important characteristics of the fallen include service status (conscript, professional, reserves), branch (military, police, Shin Bet, emergency response team), and the number of officers and members of special operation forces (SoF). Naturally, there is some overlap, since a subject must have more than one of these characteristics, as they must both belong to a branch and hold a certain service status. The table below provides the number of fallen security personnel for each of these characteristics:


Conscripts
	167
	Professionals 
	145
	Reserves 
	57
	Military 
	261
	Police
	58
	Shin Bet
	7
	Emergency response team
	43
	Officers 
	64
	Special operations forces 
	60
	

The data on the fallen’s organizational affiliations and status demonstrate how the responding forces were integrated, despite their diversity, through bottom-up organization. Just to give a few examples, the police suffered 58 human casualties (approximately 16% of the sample), a testament to the fact that policemen acted like infantry soldiers during the attack, fighting together - desk officers, YASAM, and YAMAM. This data also demonstrates how the distinction between internal security and national security was blurred. On the other side of the spectrum, Shin Bet operatives, who usually perform covert missions, also fought “regular” warfare during the attack, using their personal weapons, as well as traditional military weapons. Lastly, soldiers from special operations units accounted for more than 16% of casualties. This speaks to their ethos of being the first to respond, even if that means arriving at the scene in their personal vehicles rather than with their organic squads. 


Analysis 
The sample was analyzed to determine whether there is a meaningful difference between those stationed at the Gaza Envelope and those who joined the fighting spontaneously. Such a difference can hint at the characteristics of the effective forces that helped halt the attack relatively quickly and regain control of the area. 


According to our frequency analysis, there are meaningful differences between those who joined and those who were at the scene to begin with, all with a high level of confidence: 




	Joined 
	Not-Joined
	Officers 
	60% 
	15.6%
	Special operations 
	33.3% 
	4.6%
	Combat soldiers 
	88%
	66.5%
	Conscripts 
	9.3%
	69.7%
	Professional 
	55.3%
	28.4%
	Reserves 
	35.3%
	1.8%
	Military 
	43.3%
	89.4%
	Shin Bet
	4%
	0.5%
	Police 
	24%
	10.1%
	Emergency response team
	28.7%
	* 	

This data shows stark differences between the first and second waves of respondents and hints at the individuals more likely to join the fighting without being called by higher command. Importantly, officers are more likely to join that non-officers (60% of joiners were officers, so only 40% were not), a statement that remains true for the entire professional cadre; members of SoFs are likely to join, as their share in joiners (33.3%) is higher than their share in the IDF; conscripts are less likely to join; military and emergency response teams (supervised by the army) were the majority of joiners. 


Anova analysis reinforces these findings. The two meaningful differences in time elapsed between the start of the attack and the time of death are for branches and for service status. Overall, those belonging to the IDF lasted the most hours, followed by the police, emergency response teams, and the Shin Bet. This could be explained by the fact that the vast majority of respondents in both waves (over 70%) are military personnel. The difference in service status, however, is indicative: the reserves lasted longest, followed by professionals, and lastly conscripts. While the data on reserves can be explained by the fact that they joined mostly in the second wave, the data on professionals versus conscripts means that the joiners, a group more abundant with officers, lasted longer and were more effective than the first wave of non-joiners, composed mostly of conscripts. Thus, while approximately 57.5% of responders were at the scene when Hamas attacked, the data support H1, that the most effective combat forces joined voluntarily. Without these forces, rich with officers and SoFs, the penetration into Israeli territory is speculated to have been deeper and lasted longer. 


On October 7th, 2023, the fighting spread along the entire Gaza Envelope, from the Zikim Beach in the north to Kerem Shalom in the south, and from Netiv HaAsara, only a few hundred meters from the fence, to Ofakin, 22 kilometers from the border. In this database, we grouped locations so roads are analyzed as the same location unit as the communities they lead to, etc. Moreover, here as well, there are observable differences between joined and not joined. The former fought in 31 locations, while the latter fought in 28. Furthermore, those who joined perished mostly in civilian locations (80.65%) as opposed to in military bases (19.35%). Those who did not join exhibited more mixed results (60.7% of locations are civilian, while 39.29% are military bases). This means that Israel managed to field a “defensive swarm” in the face of Hamas’s swarm attack, engaging the invaders in multiple locations, most notably in the second wave of responders. In almost every location, with the exception of places like Nir Oz, the invaders were met with resistance, whether by an emergency response team, a local policeman, or an off-duty IDF officer. This constant friction slowed down the invaders and prevented some murders and abductions. 


 The central characteristics of Embedded Response Capacity highlighted in this paper are joint training, decentralized execution and decision-making, urban warfare, adaptability, and ad hoc teaming. 
1. Most of the self-joined forces (72%) belong to the IDF and to emergency response teams. Both these groups undergo the same training in the same IDF facilities and use a similar operational language, thereby satisfying the joint training requirement. 
2. The responders operated in small, isolated teams, while the Gaza Division was practically defunct, and the IDF Headquarters was unable to communicate with those on the ground. Thus, both the execution and decision-making processes were decentralized. 
3. All combat soldiers in the IDF, the Israel Police, and the Shin Bet undergo urban warfare training. The fact that 88% of those who joined are combat soldiers indicates that they are all familiar with urban warfare. 
4. While the first wave of responders, those stationed in the Gaza Envelope, were unable to adapt and were killed in their bases, the second wave was able to adapt better and engage the attackers in multiple locations - on the roads, inside civilian communities, etc. 
5. Those who joined did so without being called upon and without their organic combat team. Instead, they formed ad hoc teams organized by location and skills to deliver the most effective response possible at the time. 
Therefore, the data also supports H2, that the basic characteristics of ERC  were reflected in self-joined forces.
Discussion and Conclusions 
How can such a disorganized and spontaneous response be so effective? This was the main question this paper explored. The answer, as we demonstrated, lies with embedded response capacity. In an organized, hierarchical system, information flows from the bottom up, while commands flow from top down. However, on October 7th, 2023, like in other terrorist swarming incidents targeting communications, the ground forces and the commanders were unable to communicate. Thus, information remained at the ground level, never making its way up, and commands never reached the fighting forces from the commanders. 


Without ERC, a military, or any other system in crisis for that matter, unable to communicate, will be unlikely to manage and respond to the crisis adequately. However, ERC mitigates the lack of commands from higher echelons and leverages ingenuity, initiative, and preparedness. Therefore, the fighting forces, who possess the most accurate information and situational awareness, are able to grasp the threats they face and craft a suitable response without relying on the headquarters for direction and guidance. On October 7th, 2023, thousands of tactical decisions were made in real time, on the ground, replacing the generals’ wisdom with that of the trained and resilient forces. Those decisions not only minimized civilian harm but also coalesced into a wider response that allowed Israel to retake the Gaza Envelope from Hamas within several days. A colossal intelligence failure led the Israeli security establishment to miss all indicators. However, unlike the intelligence and the IDF command, the response on the ground, by ad hoc teams of soldiers, policemen, emergency response team members, and Shin Bet operatives, allowed Israel to turn the situation on its head and regain control relatively quickly.


This research identified a recurring pattern of squads composed of individuals who had never trained together, in many cases belonging to different units and serving at different times. What tied these squads together was that they were all present at the same place, at the same time—two main elements allowed this ad-hoc teaming to work: standardization and trust. As previously mentioned, all past and present IDF soldiers are familiar with the same tactical commands, signals, and combat tactics, which enable ad hoc teams to work together effectively without dedicating time to coordination and planning. On top of that, the existing basic trust within the serving communities in Israeli society, contrasted with the brutality of the October 7th, 20203, attack, unifies these formerly foreign individuals and turns them into an effective combat squad. 


Comparing the Israeli response to the Hamas attack to the Indian response to the Mumbai attack highlights key differences that made the Israeli response far more successful than the Indian response. The failure of the Indian forces to respond effectively to a much smaller-scale attack was centered on the forces’ lack of operational police art, defined as the ability to manage more than one incident in one location and to cope with their consequences at a given time. Operational police art is essential in responding to swarm attacks, as they are characterized by forces attacking in several locations in parallel. The lack of such abilities caused the Indian forces to respond slowly, be disorganized and experience command and control failures - leading to their failure of preventing the attackers from entrenching themselves and carrying out their plans. Unlike the Indian police, the attackers maintained good communication and coordination, used diverse weaponry (light weapons, explosives, etc.), and moved from one location to another - further confusing the already inferior Indian policemen. 


A West Point analysis suggested that in order to respond successfully, India would have to create regional SWAT units capable of instant deployment, as opposed to waiting hours for the national tactical team to arrive, as was the case during the Mumbai attack, or at least by a local police force trained for urban counterterrorism or counterinsurgency. Additionally, such a force requires high situational awareness and active intelligence support - both were lacking. Moreover, security in most soft targets was weak at best, and there were no plans as to how to deal with medical, hostage release, and other aspects of attack response requiring immediate attention, or with the media that had a double effect - increasing chaos and supplying the attackers with information (Sullivan & Elkus, 2009). 


While the Israeli forces also suffered from uncoordinated intelligence flow and from command and control issues, they performed much better than the Indian forces, while dealing with a much more complicated event with thousands of attackers. First, Israel has local SWAT teams (Lotar), as well as emergency response teams trained in counterterrorism and urban warfare and armed civilians who performed military service, on the ground at any given moment. These forces, alongside similar forces who self-joined from other regions, were able to delay and even halt some of the attackers, without waiting for massive forces to arrive from the headquarters. Second, despite intelligence gaps, the forces on the ground maintained high situational awareness. Even if the collected intelligence did not make its way to their more senior commanders, it allowed the responding forces to tailor their response to the situation and respond properly. Lastly, even soft targets like civilian communities are relatively well guarded by IDF bases positioned in close proximity, and there are elaborate plans pertaining to all aspects of a terrorism attack, including hostage release, medical treatment, and the media. Albeit not working perfectly on October 7th, 2023, these plans served as a basis to the response, delegating responsibilities between different forces. 


There are several important things to consider when conducting such a research. First, in this paper, we have used fallen security personnel as proxy for fighting forces, as there were thousands of people who self-joined, many of them undocumented. Albeit unlikely in a scale that would significantly alter the results, there is a possibility of a survivor bias, or in other words, that those who survived carry different characteristics from those who perished. Second, the exact time of death is not always known, although efforts were made to verify it to the largest extent possible by cross-referenching. 


Lastly, while the sample of N=369 is large enough to perform individual analysis, it is too small to perform location-based analysis. This is an endeavour reserved for future research. Another avenue for future research engages with the determinants of the time passed until operational control. When embarking on such research, it is important to note that the standard deviation of time elapsed until operation control between locations is significant, as certain locations, like Kfar Aza, were only retaken after nearly 3 days, while other locations saw the terrorists leaving after only a few minutes. Furthermore, certain locations saw an elaborate response of various forces, while in other locations, no security personnel were present. 


Finally, analyzing the battles of October 7th, 2023, leads to the inevitable conclusion that while technology, infrastructure, intelligence, and hierarchy all failed, the individuals succeeded. The ERC model, enabled by private initiative, shared language and skills, and decentralization prevented a larger catastrophe. While it is possible it would have helped to deploy more combat soldiers at the Gaza Envelope on the eve of the attack, it is also a telling that thousands of people, more than 40% of responders elected, on their own free will, to join the fighting and protect their country and fellow Israelis. This should serve as a lesson to Israel and to other countries facing swarm terrorism, security challenges more broadly - it is worth developing embedded response capacity by maintaining reserve units which are de-facto decentralized resilience mechanisms, training relevant individuals to respond to security crises independently, supplying local forces with weaponry that allows them to respond effectively against commando and swarming forces, instill in internal security forces that understanding of military-style scenarios and their role in them, and most importantly - developing an ethos of responsibility and joining when needed.  


References 
Arquilla, J., Ronfeldt, D. (2013). Swarming and the Future of Conflict. RAND. https://www.rand.org/content/dam/rand/pubs/documented_briefings/2005/RAND_DB311.pdf 
Bar-Joseph, U. (2008). Strategic Surprise of Fundamental Flaws? The Sources of Israel’s Military Defeat at the Beginning of the 1973 War. The Journal of Military History 79 (2): 509-530. https://dx.doi.org/10.1353/jmh.2008.0127. 
Ben-Ari, E., Rosman, E., Shamir, E. (2023). Neither a Conscript nor an All-Volunteer Force: Emerging Recruiting Models. Armed Forces and Society 49 (1): 138-59. https://doi.org/10.1177/0095327X211048216 
Burnard, K., Bhamra, R. (2011). Organisational Resilience: Development of a Conceptual Framework for Organisational Responses. International Journal of Production Research 49 (18): 5581-99.  
Burnard, K., Bharma, R., Tsinopoulos, C. (2018). Building Organizational Resilience: Four Configurations. Transactions on Engineering Management 65 (3). https://doi.org/10.1109/tem.2018.2796181 
Christensen, T., Laergreid, P., Rykkja, L. H. (2006). Organizing for Crisis Management: Building Governance Capacity and Legitimacy. Public Administration Review 76 (6): 887-97. https://doi.org/10.1111/puar.12558 
Comfort, L. K. (2007). Crisis Management in Hindsight: Cognition, Communication, and Control. Public Administration Review 67: 189-97. 
Dvori, N. (2023). Planned for a Year: This is How Hamas’s Surprise Attack Happened - Step by Step. N12. https://www.mako.co.il/news-military/6361323ddea5a810/Article-db23e4bc15d1b81026.htm 
Duchek, S. (2020). Organizational Resilience: A Capability Based Conceptualization. Business Research 13 (1): 215-46. 
Edwards, S.J.A. (1999). Swarming on the Battlefield: Past, Present and Future. RAND. https://www.rand.org/content/dam/rand/pubs/monograph_reports/MR1100/RAND_MR1100.pdf
Fabian, E. (2025). Entire Gaza Division was Overrun for Hours, and IDF Didn’t Know it; 767 Troops faced 5,000 Terrorists. The Times of Israel, https://www.timesofisrael.com/767-troops-faced-5000-terrorists-gaza-division-was-overrun-for-hours-idf-oct-7-probe/?utm_source=chatgpt.com
Fabian, E. (2025). IDF Says Structural Changes to Military Inculde Bolstering Border and Sir Defense Units. The Times of Israel, https://www.timesofisrael.com/liveblog_entry/idf-says-structural-changes-to-military-include-bolstering-border-and-air-defense-units/?utm_source=chatgpt.com 
Fenema, P. C. V., Romme, A. G. (2020). Latent Organizing for Responding to Emergencies: Foundations for Research. Journal of Organization Design 9 (1). https://doi.org/10.1186/s41469-020-00074-z. 
Greene, BW. (2010). Rethinking Strategic Defence Planning under Bounded Uncertainty. Defense R&D Canada. https://apps.dtic.mil/sti/tr/pdf/ADA533235.pdf  
Israel Defense Forces. (2023). “The War’s Fallen.” IDF Website, https://www.idf.il/%D7%A0%D7%95%D7%A4%D7%9C%D7%99%D7%9D/%D7%97%D7%9C%D7%9C%D7%99-%D7%94%D7%9E%D7%9C%D7%97%D7%9E%D7%94/ 
Israel Police. (2023). In their Memory.” Israel Police Website, https://lezichram.police.gov.il/main/searchResults;isIron=true 
Kan Israel Broadcasting Services. (2024). Kan360. Kan, https://www.710360.kan.org.il/
Mapping the Massacre. (2023). Mapping the Massacre. Mapping the Massacre, https://oct7map.com/oct7map.com 
Koronis, E., P, S. (2018). Better than Before: The Resilient Organization in Crisis Mode. Journal of Business Strategy 39 (1): 32-42. https://doi.org/10.1108/jbs-10-2016-0124 
Meniv. O. (2024). The October 7th Investigation in the Kirya Pit: What Happened at the General Staff on the Black Sabbath - and the Secret Summarizing Document. N12. https://www.mako.co.il/news-military/036814c74a0e1910/Article-d63e03097de5291027.htm 
Meniv, O. (2024).11 Months Later: New Data Reveals the Scope of the October 7th Attack. N12. https://www.mako.co.il/news-military/2024_q3/Article-644f7407489a191026.htm 
Nakhoul, S., Saul, J. (2023). How Hamas Duped Israel as it Planned Devestating Attack. reuters. https://www.reuters.com/world/middle-east/how-israel-was-duped-hamas-planned-devastating-assault-2023-10-08/?utm_source=chatgpt.com 
NDTV. (2009). Mumbai Terrorist Attacks Nov. 26-29, 2008 .NDTV. https://web.archive.org/web/20090117212606/http://ndtv.com/convergence/ndtv/MumbaiDossier/Mumbai-1-20-1st.htm 
Seibt, S. (2015). Paris Attacks: An Unprecedented Investigation. France 24. https://graphics.france24.com/paris-attacks-investigation-terrorism-belgium-bataclan-suspects/index.html 
Spek, U., Anderson, I. (2022). Modelling Command and Control: Potential Negative Effects of Transferring Features of the Individual to the Organization. Proceedings of the International  Command and Control Research and Technology Symposium. diva2:1724889  
Sullivan, J. P., Elkus, A. (2009). Preventing Another Mumbai: Building a Police Operational Art. CTC Centennial 2 (6). https://ctc.westpoint.edu/wp-content/uploads/2010/06/Vol2Iss6-Art2.pdf 
Williams, T. A., Gruber, D. A., Sutcliffe, K. M., Shepherd, D. A., Zhao, E. Y. (2017). Organizational Response to Adversity: Fusing Crisis Management and Resilience Research Streams. Academy Management Annals 2 (2): 733-69. https://doi.org/10.5465/annals.2015.0134 
Yordanov, S.(2025). Swarming Terrorist Attack as an Evolving Threat for the European Security. Environment Technology Resources Proceedings of the International Scientific and Practical Conference: 341–48. DOI:10.17770/etr2025vol5.8481